docs: add concepts page for sla-violation-profiler (#150)
open-component-model/open-delivery-gear: docs/website/contents/concepts/06-sla-violation-profiler.md

# SLA Violation Profiler

## Overview

The SLA-Violation-Profiler extension derives auditable evidence of Service
Level Agreement (SLA) compliance from findings that already exist in the ODG
delivery database. For a configured OCM root component, it evaluates whether
findings were resolved or rescored within the processing time
that the SLA permits, and persists the outcome as `sla_violation` records

> that can be queried for reporting and audits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SLA-Violation-Profiler derives auditable evidence of Service
Level Agreement (SLA) compliance from findings that already exist in the ODG database. For a configured OCM root component, it recursively evaluates whether
findings were resolved or rescored within the processing time
that the SLA permits, and persists the outcome as `sla_violation` records
that can be queried for reporting and audits.
```

## Motivation

Compliance obligations require software teams to demonstrate that findings
were handled within agreed timeframes. Reconstructing this evidence manually
for a past audit period is expensive: findings, rescorings and release dates
must be correlated across many component versions. The SLA-Violation-Profiler
automates this correlation and produces a persistent, per-release verdict
that can be replayed later without recomputing the underlying history.

## Scope

- **Input**: an OCM root component and either a specific version or a time
  range of versions to evaluate.

> - **Finding types evaluated**: all finding types available in the ODG data model.

Reviewer: is this already covered? I thought we by know only scope vulnerabilities?

Author: Originally i wrote only vulnerabilities but @8R0WNI3 metioned to change to every finding cause its the goal state see [ref](https://github.com/open-component-model/open-delivery-gear/pull/150#discussion_r3534912700)

Reviewer 2: I would suggest to not state which finding types are supported here (currently) (neither "only vulnerability findings" nor "all finding types") because this information is likely to become outdated soon. Imo we should not create documentation of which we know that it will become outdated in the near future (both to save the effort as well as to reduce the risk of providing wrong information) as well as we should not provide documentation which is not correct (yet).

Reviewer: agree, let's keep it generic in this case.
actually, I think we can just drop this part from the scoping section

- **Output**: one `sla_violation` `ArtefactMetadata` record per evaluated root
  component version, containing the list of individual policy violations that
  remained open at that version's release date.
- **Persistence**: results are written back to the database through
  the ODG Core API.

## How It Works

The profiler follows a two-step approach: recognise policy violations per
component version, then materialise them as a single SLA record for the
release.

### 1. Resolve versions to evaluate

For each configured component, the profiler determines the set of versions to
scan:

- If a fixed `version` is configured, that version is used directly.
- Otherwise, the ODG Core API is queried for the most recent component
  versions within the configured `time_range`, bounded by
  `max_versions_limit`.

Versions for which an `sla_violation` record already exists in the delivery

> database are skipped. This makes the extension safe to re-run: prior audits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
database are skipped. This makes the extension safe to re-run (idempotent): prior audits
```

remain stable, and only new releases will be evaluated.

### 2. Collect findings and rescorings for the release

For each version, the profiler resolves the OCM root descriptor and traverses
the component graph to collect the identities of all
transitively referenced components. It then queries the ODG Core API for:

> - all finding records attached to any of these components; and

Reviewer: technically it is not the component identity alone, but the artefact identity (which indirectly also contains the component identity)

    H -- Yes --> V[Emit SlaViolation]
    H -- No --> N[noop]
    V --> P[Persist one sla_violation record per version]
    N --> P
```

## Data Model

The extension produces records of type `sla_violation` and datasource
`sla-violation-profiler`. The `data` payload has the following shape:

- `SlaViolations`
  - `sla_violations`: list of
    - `SlaViolation`
      - `finding`: the type-specific identifying fields of the underlying finding
      - `referenced_type`: the datatype of the underlying finding
        (e.g. any `finding/*` datatype supported by the ODG data model)
      - `artefact`: the `ComponentArtefactId` the finding was attached to

See {doc}`/contents/concepts/01-data-model` for the surrounding
`ArtefactMetadata` model.

## Idempotency and Re-runs

The extension is designed to run as a scheduled job. Because existing
`sla_violation` records for a `(component_name, component_version)` pair
suppress re-evaluation, re-runs process only those versions that have not yet
been profiled. To re-evaluate a version after its underlying data has changed,
the existing `sla_violation` record must first be removed from the delivery

> database.

Reviewer: let's reference the [run custom SQL commands how-to](https://github.com/open-component-model/open-delivery-gear/pull/140/changes#diff-5827f3da6fb6cf1df5b36a71b2980c36f6730c4caf278730ea358b5df527b1d8) here already

# SLA Violation Profiler

## Overview

The SLA-Violation-Profiler extension derives auditable evidence of Service
Level Agreement (SLA) compliance from findings that already exist in the ODG
delivery database. For a configured OCM root component, it evaluates whether

> vulnerability findings were resolved or rescored within the processing time

Reviewer 2: Since the extension is intended to support all available finding types, I think we should not explicitly mention vulnerability findings here (ditto below).

that the SLA permits, and persists the outcome as `sla_violation` records
that can be queried for reporting and audits.

## Motivation

Compliance obligations require software teams to demonstrate that findings
were handled within agreed timeframes. Reconstructing this evidence manually
for a past audit period is expensive: findings, rescorings and release dates
must be correlated across many component versions. The SLA-Violation-Profiler
automates this correlation and produces a persistent, per-release verdict
that can be replayed later without recomputing the underlying history.

## Scope

> - **Input**: an OCM root component (name, OCM repository, and either a

Reviewer 2: I would suggest to leave out the mentioning of the OCM repository here since it is a technical detail which is not required to understand the concept of the SLA violation profiler.

  specific version or a time range of versions to evaluate).
- **Finding type evaluated**: currently `finding/vulnerability`.

> - **Output**: one `sla_violation` `ArtefactMetadata` record per evaluated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Output**: one `sla_violation` `ArtefactMetadata` record per evaluated root
```

  component version, containing the list of individual policy violations that
  remained open at that version's release date.

> - **Persistence**: results are written back to the delivery database through

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Persistence**: results are written back to the database through the ODG Core API
```

  the delivery service.

## How It Works

The profiler follows a two-step approach: recognise policy violations per
component version, then materialise them as a single SLA record for the
release.

### 1. Resolve versions to evaluate

For each configured component, the profiler determines the set of versions to
scan:

- If a fixed `version` is configured, that version is used directly.

> - Otherwise, the delivery service is queried for the most recent component

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Otherwise, the ODG Core API is queried for the most recent component
```
ditto below for further references

  versions within the configured `time_range`, bounded by
  `max_versions_limit`.

Versions for which an `sla_violation` record already exists in the delivery
database are skipped. This makes the extension safe to re-run: prior audits

> remain stable, and only new releases trigger fresh work.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
remain stable, and only new releases will be evaluated.
```

### 2. Collect findings and rescorings for the release

For each version, the profiler resolves the OCM root descriptor and traverses

> the component graph via `ocm.iter` to collect the identities of all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the component graph to collect the identities of all
```
I think this is an unnecessary technical detail in this context which only brings the risk of becoming outdated.

transitively referenced components. It then queries the delivery service for:

- all `finding/vulnerability` records attached to any of these components; and
- all `rescoring` records that reference those vulnerability findings.

The version's **release date** is taken from the root component's creation

> date. All timestamps are normalised before comparison.

Reviewer 2: I'd say the normalisation of timestamps is a general ODG topic (although it might not be consistently implemented) and not strictly related to this extension, hence I'd drop it from here.

### 3. Determine the effective deadline per finding

For each finding, an initial deadline is computed from its discovery date and
its `allowed_processing_time`:

```
deadline = discovery_date + allowed_processing_time
```

Findings without an `allowed_processing_time` are ignored, since no SLA
applies. Findings whose `meta.creation_date` is later than the release date
are also ignored, because they did not yet exist at the moment of release.

Rescorings created after the release date are discarded, as they represent
knowledge the release could not have had. The remaining rescorings are sorted
by creation date and applied in order. Each rescoring can shift the effective
deadline in one of three ways:

- an explicit `due_date` on the rescoring becomes the new deadline;
- an updated `allowed_processing_time` is added to the original discovery
  date to produce a new deadline; or

> - if neither is set, the deadline is cleared and no SLA applies from that

Reviewer 2: > no SLA applies from that point on

I think is is not completely correct. If a rescoring clears the deadline, but it is still followed by another rescoring which sets a deadline again, the finding might still result in an SLA violation.

Reviewer 2: Unresolved this because I think this comment is still valid 🤔

Author: There was a failure with push and pull which made it back to original the two which you unresolved. Thanks for pointing that out. Should not hopefully be fixed.
